C++ - Module 01
Memory allocation, pointers to members,
references and switch statements
Summary:
This document contains the exercises of Module 01 from C++ modules.
Version: 11.1
Contents
I
Introduction
2
II General rules
III AI Instructions
IV Exercise 00: BraiiiiiiinnnzzzZ
V Exercise 01: Moar brainz!
VI Exercise 02: HI THIS IS BRAIN
VII Exercise 03: Unnecessary violence
VIII Exercise 04: Sed is for losers
IX Exercise 05: Harl 2.0
X Exercise 06: Harl filter
XI Submission and peer-evaluation
3
6
8
9
10
11
13
14
16
17
1
Chapter I
Introduction
C++ is a general-purpose programming language created by Bjarne Stroustrup as an ex-
tension of the C programming language, or "C with Classes" (source: Wikipedia).
The goal of these modules is to introduce you to Object-Oriented Programming.
This will be the starting point of your C++ journey. Many languages are recommended
for learning OOP. We have chosen C++ since it is derived from your old friend, C.
Because this is a complex language, and in order to keep things simple, your code will
comply with the C++98 standard.
We are aware that modern C++ is very different in many aspects. So if you want to
become a proficient C++ developer, it is up to you to go further after the 42 Common
Core!
2
Chapter II
General rules
Compiling
• Compile your code with c++ and the flags -Wall -Wextra -Werror
• Your code should still compile if you add the flag -std=c++98
Formatting and naming conventions
• The exercise directories will be named this way: ex00, ex01, ... , exn
• Name your files, classes, functions, member functions and attributes as required in
the guidelines.
• Write class names in UpperCamelCase format. Files containing class code will
always be named according to the class name. For instance:
ClassName.hpp/ClassName.h, ClassName.cpp, or ClassName.tpp. Then, if you
have a header file containing the definition of a class "BrickWall" standing for a
brick wall, its name will be BrickWall.hpp.
• Unless specified otherwise, every output message must end with a newline character
and be displayed to the standard output.
• Goodbye Norminette! No coding style is enforced in the C++ modules. You can
follow your favorite one. But keep in mind that code your peer evaluators can’t
understand is code they can’t grade. Do your best to write clean and readable code.
Allowed/Forbidden
You are not coding in C anymore. Time to C++! Therefore:
• You are allowed to use almost everything from the standard library. Thus, instead
of sticking to what you already know, it would be smart to use the C++-ish versions
of the C functions you are used to as much as possible.
• However, you can’t use any other external library. It means C++11 (and derived
forms) and Boost libraries are forbidden. The following functions are forbidden
too: *printf(), *alloc() and free(). If you use them, your grade will be 0 and
that’s it.
3
C++ - Module 01
Memory allocation, pointers to members,
references and switch statements
• Note that unless explicitly stated otherwise, the using namespace <ns_name> and
friend keywords are forbidden. Otherwise, your grade will be -42.
• You are allowed to use the STL only in Modules 08 and 09. That means:
no Containers (vector/list/map, and so forth) and no Algorithms (anything that
requires including the <algorithm> header) until then. Otherwise, your grade will
be -42.
A few design requirements
• Memory leakage occurs in C++ too. When you allocate memory (by using the new
keyword), you must avoid memory leaks.
• From Module 02 to Module 09, your classes must be designed in the Orthodox
Canonical Form, except when explicitly stated otherwise.
• Any function implementation put in a header file (except for function templates)
means 0 to the exercise.
• You should be able to use each of your headers independently from others. Thus,
they must include all the dependencies they need. However, you must avoid the
problem of double inclusion by adding include guards. Otherwise, your grade will
be 0.
Read me
• You can add some additional files if you need to (i.e., to split your code). As these
assignments are not verified by a program, feel free to do so as long as you turn in
the mandatory files.
• Sometimes, the guidelines of an exercise look short but the examples can show
requirements that are not explicitly written in the instructions.
• Read each module completely before starting! Really, do it.
• By Odin, by Thor! Use your brain!!!
Regarding the Makefile for C++ projects, the same rules as in C apply
(see the Norm chapter about the Makefile).
You will have to implement a lot of classes. This can seem tedious,
unless you’re able to script your favorite text editor.
4
C++ - Module 01
Memory allocation, pointers to members,
references and switch statements
You are given a certain amount of freedom to complete the exercises.
However, follow the mandatory rules and don’t be lazy. You would
miss a lot of useful information! Do not hesitate to read about
theoretical concepts.
5
Chapter IV
Exercise 00: BraiiiiiiinnnzzzZ
Exercise: 00
BraiiiiiiinnnzzzZ
Directory: ex00/
Files to Submit: Makefile, main.cpp, Zombie.{h, hpp}, Zombie.cpp,
newZombie.cpp, randomChump.cpp
Forbidden: None
First, implement a Zombie class. It has a private string attribute name.
Add a member function void announce( void ); to the Zombie class. Zombies
announce themselves as follows:
<name>: BraiiiiiiinnnzzzZ...
Do not print the angle brackets (< and >). For a zombie named Foo, the message
would be:
Foo: BraiiiiiiinnnzzzZ...
Then, implement the following two functions:
• Zombie* newZombie( std::string name );
This function creates a zombie, names it, and returns it so you can use it outside
of the function scope.
• void randomChump( std::string name );
This function creates a zombie, names it, and makes it announce itself.
Now, what is the actual point of the exercise? You have to determine in which case
it is better to allocate zombies on the stack or the heap.
Zombies must be destroyed when you no longer need them. The destructor must print
a message with the name of the zombie for debugging purposes.
8
Chapter V
Exercise 01: Moar brainz!
Exercise: 01
Moar brainz!
Directory: ex01/
Files to Submit: Makefile, main.cpp, Zombie.{h, hpp}, Zombie.cpp,
zombieHorde.cpp
Forbidden: None
Time to create a horde of Zombies!
Implement the following function in the appropriate file:
Zombie* zombieHorde( int N, std::string name );
It must allocate N Zombie objects in a single allocation. Then, it must initialize the
zombies, giving each of them the name passed as a parameter. The function returns a
pointer to the first zombie.
Implement your own tests to ensure that your zombieHorde() function works as ex-
pected. Try calling announce() for each of the zombies.
Do not forget to use delete to deallocate all the zombies and check for memory
leaks.
9
Chapter VI
Exercise 02: HI THIS IS BRAIN
Exercise: 02
HI THIS IS BRAIN
Directory: ex02/
Files to Submit: Makefile, main.cpp
Forbidden: None
Write a program that contains:
• A string variable initialized to "HI THIS IS BRAIN".
• stringPTR: a pointer to the string.
• stringREF: a reference to the string.
Your program must print:
• The memory address of the string variable.
• The memory address held by stringPTR.
• The memory address held by stringREF.
And then:
• The value of the string variable.
• The value pointed to by stringPTR.
• The value pointed to by stringREF.
That’s all—no tricks. The goal of this exercise is to demystify references, which may
seem completely new. Although there are some small differences, this is simply another
syntax for something you already do: address manipulation.
10
Chapter VII
Exercise 03: Unnecessary violence
Exercise: 03
Unnecessary violence
Directory: ex03/
Files to Submit: Makefile, main.cpp, Weapon.{h, hpp}, Weapon.cpp, HumanA.{h,
hpp}, HumanA.cpp, HumanB.{h, hpp}, HumanB.cpp
Forbidden: None
Implement a Weapon class that has:
• A private attribute type, which is a string.
• A getType() member function that returns a constant reference to type.
• A setType() member function that sets type using the new value passed as a pa-
rameter.
Now, create two classes: HumanA and HumanB. They both have a Weapon and
a name. They also have a member function attack() that displays (without the angle
brackets):
<name> attacks with their <weapon type>
HumanA and HumanB are almost identical except for these two small details:
• While HumanA takes the Weapon in its constructor, HumanB does not.
• HumanB may not always have a weapon, whereas HumanA will always be
armed.
11
C++ - Module 01
Memory allocation, pointers to members,
references and switch statements
If your implementation is correct, executing the following code will print an attack
with "crude spiked club" followed by a second attack with "some other type of club" for
both test cases:
int main()
{
{
Weapon club = Weapon("crude spiked club");
HumanA bob("Bob", club);
bob.attack();
club.setType("some other type of club");
bob.attack();
}
{
Weapon club = Weapon("crude spiked club");
HumanB jim("Jim");
jim.setWeapon(club);
jim.attack();
club.setType("some other type of club");
jim.attack();
}
return 0;
}
Do not forget to check for memory leaks.
In which case do you think it would be best to use a pointer to
Weapon? And a reference to Weapon? Why? Think about it before
starting this exercise.
12
Chapter VIII
Exercise 04: Sed is for losers
Exercise: 04
Sed is for losers
Directory: ex04/
Files to Submit: Makefile, main.cpp, *.cpp, *.{h, hpp}
Forbidden: std::string::replace
Create a program that takes three parameters in the following order: a filename and
two strings, s1 and s2.
It must open the file <filename> and copy its content into a new file
<filename>.replace, replacing every occurrence of s1 with s2.
Using C file manipulation functions is forbidden and will be considered cheating. All
the member functions of the class std::string are allowed, except replace. Use them
wisely!
Of course, handle unexpected inputs and errors. You must create and turn in your
own tests to ensure that your program works as expected.
13
Chapter IX
Exercise 05: Harl 2.0
Exercise: 05
Harl 2.0
Directory: ex05/
Files to Submit: Makefile, main.cpp, Harl.{h, hpp}, Harl.cpp
Forbidden: None
Do you know Harl? We all do, don’t we? In case you don’t, find below the kind of
comments Harl makes. They are classified by levels:
• "DEBUG" level: Debug messages contain contextual information. They are mostly
used for problem diagnosis.
Example: "I love having extra bacon for my 7XL-double-cheese-triple-pickle-special-
ketchup burger. I really do!"
• "INFO" level: These messages contain extensive information. They are helpful for
tracing program execution in a production environment.
Example: "I cannot believe adding extra bacon costs more money. You didn’t put
enough bacon in my burger! If you did, I wouldn’t be asking for more!"
• "WARNING" level: Warning messages indicate a potential issue in the system.
However, it can be handled or ignored.
Example: "I think I deserve to have some extra bacon for free. I’ve been coming for
years, whereas you started working here just last month."
• "ERROR" level: These messages indicate that an unrecoverable error has occurred.
This is usually a critical issue that requires manual intervention.
Example: "This is unacceptable! I want to speak to the manager now."
14
C++ - Module 01
Memory allocation, pointers to members,
references and switch statements
You are going to automate Harl. It won’t be difficult since he always says the same
things. You have to create a Harl class with the following private member functions:
• void debug( void );
• void info( void );
• void warning( void );
• void error( void );
Harl also has a public member function that calls the four member functions above
depending on the level passed as a parameter:
void complain( std::string level );
The goal of this exercise is to use pointers to member functions. This is not a
suggestion. Harl has to complain without using a forest of if/else if/else. He doesn’t
think twice!
Create and turn in tests to show that Harl complains a lot. You can use the examples
of comments listed above in the subject or choose to use comments of your own.
15
Chapter X
Exercise 06: Harl filter
Exercise: 06
Harl filter
Directory: ex06/
Files to Submit: Makefile, main.cpp, Harl.{h, hpp}, Harl.cpp
Forbidden: None
Sometimes you don’t want to pay attention to everything Harl says. Implement a
system to filter what Harl says depending on the log levels you want to listen to.
Create a program that takes as a parameter one of the four levels. It will display all
messages from this level and above. For example:
$> ./harlFilter "WARNING"
[ WARNING ]
I think I deserve to have some extra bacon for free.
I've been coming for years, whereas you started working here just last month.
[ ERROR ]
This is unacceptable! I want to speak to the manager now.
$> ./harlFilter "I am not sure how tired I am today..."
[ Probably complaining about insignificant problems ]
Although there are several ways to deal with Harl, one of the most effective is to
SWITCH it off.
Give the name harlFilter to your executable.
You must use, and maybe discover, the switch statement in this exercise.
You can pass this module without doing exercise 06.
16
Chapter XI
Submission and peer-evaluation
Turn in your assignment in your Git repository as usual. Only the work inside your repos-
itory will be evaluated during the defense. Don’t hesitate to double-check the names of
your folders and files to ensure they are correct.
During the evaluation, a brief modification of the project may occasionally be re-
quested. This could involve a minor behaviour change, a few lines of code to write or
rewrite, or an easy-to-add feature.
While this step may not be applicable to every project, you must be prepared for it
if it is mentioned in the evaluation guidelines.
This step is meant to verify your actual understanding of a specific part of the project.
The modification can be performed in any development environment you choose (e.g.,
your usual setup), and it should be feasible within a few minutes — unless a specific time
frame is defined as part of the evaluation.
You can, for example, be asked to make a small update to a function or script, modify a
display, or adjust a data structure to store new information, etc.
The details (scope, target, etc.) will be specified in the evaluation guidelines and may
vary from one evaluation to another for the same project.